

  Investigative Radiology  

      Issue: Volume 33(9), September 1998, pp 682-686
      Copyright: (C) 1998 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.
      Publication Type: [Original Investigation]
      ISSN: 0020-9996
      Accession: 00004424-199809000-00024
      Keywords: Mesenteric ischemia, blood flow quantitation, magnetic resonance
angiography       

 [Original Investigation]

  Contrast-Enhanced Three-Dimensional Magnetic Resonance Angiography of the
Splanchnic Vasculature Before and After Caloric Stimulation  

  HANY, THOMAS F. MD; SCHMIDT, MICHAELA RT; SCHOENENBERGER, ANDREAS W. MD;
DEBATIN, JORG F. MD  

    Author Information 

  From the Institute of Diagnostic Radiology, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.  

  Reprint requests: Jorg F. Debatin, MD, Institute of Diagnostic Radiology,
University Hospital Zurich, Ramistrasse 100, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland;
e-mail: debatin@dmr.usz.ch.  

  Received January 14, 1998 and accepted for publication March 24, 1998.  

----------------------------------------------

    Outline

    Abstract

    Materials and Methods

    Flow Quantitation

    Contrast-Enhanced Three-Dimensional Magnetic Resonance Angiography

    Results

    Flow Quantitation

    Contrast-Enhanced Three-dimensional Magnetic Resonance Angiography

    Discussion

    References

Abstract

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES. To develop a comprehensive noninvasive magnetic
resonance angiography (MRA) strategy for the morphologic and functional
assessment of the splanchnic arteries, based on a combination of breath-held
contrastenhanced 3D MRA and segmented k-space 2D phase-contrast acquisitions
acquired before and after caloric stimulation.

METHODS. Ten healthy volunteers were examined twice: once in the fasting state
(6 hours with no food intake) and a second time following caloric stimulation
with a standard 475-kcal meal. Flow in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and
vein (SMV) was quantitated using a 2D breath-held, segmented k-space phase-contrast
(PC) acquisition in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the vessels, while
vascular morphology was displayed with a contrast-enhanced 3D MRA acquisition
consisting of 44 contiguous 2-mm sections, acquired in apnea (28 seconds). For
comparative analysis, the splanchnic vasculature was divided into 11 segments
and evaluated on a 2-point scale (cannot exclude pathology, can exclude
pathology).

RESULTS. Flow volume in the SMA increased from 2.3 ml/min/kg (+/-0.9 ml/min kg)
to 7.3 ml/min kg (+/-4.7 ml/min kg) following caloric stimulation (P            


Caloric stimulation significantly improved visualization of the splanchnic
arterial vasculature (P             

CONCLUSION. Magnetic resonance imaging offers a comprehensive assessment of the
splanchnic arterial vasculature based on 3D display of vessel morphology and
analysis of flow function. While the most relevant proximal vessel segments are
visible even under fasting conditions, caloric stimulation enhances visualization
of small vessels.

----------------------------------------------

THE CAUSES OF MESENTERIC ischemia include atherosclerosis, vasospasm, and
arterial embolism as well as mesenteric venous thrombosis. Reflecting the
differences in underlying causes, two distinct clinical entities are differentiated:
chronic and acute mesenteric ischemia. While the latter is characterized by a
gradual onset of disease affecting at least two of three splanchnic arteries
without acute threat to bowel survival, acute ischemia is associated with a
considerable risk of bowel infarction resulting in high morbidity and mortality.1,2
Common to both forms of mesenteric ischemia are nonspecific abdominal symptoms,
which often manifest late.

Reflecting the lack of specific clinical clues, mesenteric ischemia is
frequently entertained as one possibility on a long list of differential
considerations. The invasiveness of conventional angiography, which to date
remains the dominant diagnostic means for assessing the celiac trunk and
mesenteric arteries, often represents an impediment to the active pursuance of
this consideration. Resulting delays in diagnosis can be associated with
increased morbidity and mortality. The availability of a noninvasive imaging
strategy that would lower the threshold for assessing the splanchnic vasculature
is thus highly desirable.

The availability of high-performance gradient systems has enabled the acquisition
of 3D MR data sets within a single breath-hold.3 Combined with intravenous
paramagnetic contrast, the arterial vessels in the abdomen can be selectively
displayed.4 This 3D technique has been shown to be most accurate in the
assessment of various vascular territories, including the renal and pelvic
arteries.4,5 Furthermore, the MR experiment permits accurate quantification of
flow volumes, providing a basis for determining the hemodynamic significance of
stenoses.5-8 The purpose of this study was to develop a comprehensive noninvasive
MR strategy for the morphologic and functional assessment of the splanchnic
arteries. The SMA and celiac trunk of healthy volunteers were assessed before
and after caloric stimulation with breath-held contrast-enhanced 3D MRA and
segmented k-space 2D phase-contrast acquisitions.

Materials and Methods

Ten healthy volunteers (5 men, 5 women) aged 21 to 28 years (mean age 23.6
years) were enrolled in the study. After written informed consent was obtained,
as set forth by the guidelines of our institutional review board, each volunteer
was imaged twice: following 6 hours of fasting and 15 minutes following caloric
stimulation with a 475-kcal meal (TwoCall, Abbott, Switzerland). The two imaging
sessions for each volunteer were separated by at least 24 hours. All imaging was
performed on a 1.5-T MR scanner (Signa EchoSpeed, GEMS, Milwaukee, USA),
equipped with an ultrafast three-axis gradient system.

Flow Quantitation

Flow in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and vein (SMV) was quantified using
a breath-held phase-contrast (PC) technique. Based on sagittal localizing
gradientrecalled echo images (TR/TE, flip, 10-mm section) a segmented k-space PC
acquisition (fastcard PC) was planned in the axial plane transsecting the
proximal segment of the SMA and SMV. The PC data were collected during
breath-hold by use of the following parameters: 6 views per segment, TR/TE
12.8/4.2 milliseconds, flip-angle 45[degrees]. A matrix of 256 x 192 combined
with a FOV of 32 cm rendered an inplane resolution of 1.6 x 1.8 x 2 mm. To avoid
aliasing, a velocity encoding value of 200 cm/second was chosen. Depending on
heart rate, between 7 and 15 phases were reconstructed within a single cardiac
cycle. The PC flow maps were transferred to an independent work-station (SPARC
20), where flow volumes were determined in the SMA and SMV using a semiautomated
software program permitting automated edge detection. A threshold of 40% of the
maximal signal within the vessel determined in each of the acquired frames was
used to define the vessel contours.

Contrast-Enhanced Three-Dimensional Magnetic Resonance Angiography

Following flow quantitation, the splanchnic vasulature was imaged using a 3D
fast spoiled gradient-recalled echo acquisition: TR/TE 4.0/1.9 milliseconds,
flip 40[degrees]. The data were sampled with a bandwidth of +/-62.5 kHz. A 28-
to 32-cm FOV, coupled with a 256 x 160 matrix, rendered an in-plane resolution
of 1.25 x 1.67 mm. The data for 44 contiguous, coronal 2-mm sections were
collected during breath-hold in 28 seconds using 3/4 partial k-space sampling.

The 3D acquisition was enhanced by the intravenous application of Gd-DTPA
(Magnevist, Schering AG, Berlin, Germany). The contrast agent was administered
at a dosage of 0.3 mmol/kg, injected intravenously via a 20-gauge needle by a
power injector (MR-Spectris, Medrad, PA) at a rate of 2.5 ml/second. To assure
optimal timing of the contrast bolus, the contrast travel time from the
injection site in the antecubital vein to the SMA origin from the aorta was
determined before the 3D acquisition. For that purpose, sagittal multiphase
gradient-recalled echo images transsecting the aorta were acquired at a rate of
1/second following the administration of a Gd-DTPA test bolus (4 ml). Using the
multi-image region-of-interest (MIROI) function, a signal intensity curve was
determined within the aorta at the level of the superior mesenteric artery
origin over the total acquisition time of 40 seconds.9 The bolus was timed for
the contrast travel time to coincide with the beginning of central k-space
collection. An anteroposterior phased-array surface coil was used in conjunction
with standard receivers for signal reception.

Analysis was based on maximum intensity projections as well as 2-mm thick
multiplanar reformations in any desired plane. All segments were qualitatively
analyzed by an experienced MR radiologist, who was blinded to the state of
caloric stimulation and the volunteers' identities. Qualitative analysis was
performed on a 2-point scale for the evaluated segments, as follows: 0 = cannot
exclude pathology; 1 = can exclude pathology.

For purposes of analysis, the splanchnic vasculature was divided into the
following 11 segments: aorta, celiac trunk, common hepatic artery, proper
hepatic artery, splenic artery, gastroduodenal artery, anterior and posterior
pancreaticoduodenal arcade, inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, superior
mesenteric artery, and ilial/jejunal arteries.

Results

Flow Quantitation

The mean flow in the SMA before stimulation amounted to 2.3 ml/min kg (+/-0.9
ml/min/kg) and rose to 7.3 ml/min/kg (+/-4.7 ml/min/kg) following caloric
stimulation. The increase was statistically significant (P P r = 0.74) compared
to following stimulation (r = 0.94). Flow volumes in the SMV exceeded SMA flow
both before and after caloric stimulation (P             

Contrast-Enhanced Three-dimensional Magnetic Resonance Angiography

Qualitative assessment data regarding visualization of the various vessel was as
follows: Before caloric stimulation, 18 of 110 (16.3%) evaluated segments were
graded as not sufficiently well seen to exclude pathology. The anterior and
posterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade (10 segments) were not seen in 5 volunteers,
the posterior pancreaticoduodenal arcade in 5, and the left gastric artery in 3
volunteers (Fig. 1). The inferior mesenteric artery was seen in 6 volunteers.

After stimulation, the number of splanchnic vascular segments seen sufficiently
well to exclude pathology increased significantly from 92 to 105 (P             

Discussion

Although limited to volunteers, this study illustrates the potential associated
with a comprehensive MR-based assessment of the splanchnic vasculature.
Breath-held data acquisition strategies assure high image quality, permitting
both morphologic and functional assessment of the abdominal arterial vasculature.
To that end, the increase in flow volume associated with caloric stimulation can
and should be exploited.

Mesenteric ischemia remains a frequently perplexing diagnostic dilemma. Chronic
mesenteric ischemia is caused by stenosis or occlusion of the proximal
splanchnic arteries. Despite the high incidence of celiac and mesenteric artery
stenosis in patients with advanced atherosclerotic disease, the syndrome of
mesenteric ischemia is rare. This observation reflects the presence of a rich
collateral network in the form of vascular arcades, which compensate for
stenosis or occlusion of a single vessel. Patients generally do not develop
mesenteric ischemia unless blood flow in at least two of the three visceral
arteries is severely compromised. In the acute setting, on the other hand,
high-grade stenosis or occlusion of a single vessel, usually the SMA, is
sufficient to cause widespread bowel infarction. Angiography reveals an abrupt
occlusion of the SMA without evidence of collateralization. While acute
thrombosis generally affects the SMA origin, most emboli become manifest 3 to 10
cm distal to the SMA origin at the take-off of the middle colic artery.10

To date, the clinical diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia often remains one of
exclusion. Delays in diagnosis are compounded by the propensity for symptoms of
mesenteric ischemia to overlap with and mimic those of more common intestinal
disorders, such as peptic ulcer disease, chronic cholecystitis, and pancreatic
carcinoma.10 An early diagnosis is highly desirable in view of the considerable
morbidity and mortality associated with mesenteric ischemia and the availability
of therapeutic options, including surgical endarterectomy and reimplantation as
well as transluminal angioplasty or stenting of the diseased vessels, offering
primary success rates between 80% and 100% and long-term clinical improvement in
50% to 75% of patients.

Although several noninvasive imaging techniques have been evaluated for the
assessment of the splanchnic vasculature, inherent limitations have prevented
their widespread clinical implementation. Thus, the use of duplex sonography is
inhibited by the presence of bowel gas and calcifications within the vessel
walls.11,12 Respiratory motion, pulsatility, and blurring have prevented
visualization of vessel morphology beyond the proximal 2- to 3-cm with
conventional MR angiographic techniques.7,13 As a result, only 66% of SMA
pathologic states were correctly diagnosed with these techniques.14

This study confirms previous reports regarding the ability of contrast-enhanced
3D MRA to provide a comprehensive morphologic analysis of the SMA and celiac
trunk.15 Even small branch vessels of the trunk, as well as the superior and
inferior mesenteric arborizations are discernible (Fig. 1 B, Fig. 2). Image
quality was sufficient to even permit identification and assessment of the
inferior mesenteric artery. This qualitative assessment did correlate by
quantitative analysis, showing significantly higher SNR values in vessels
following caloric stimulation (P             

The clinically most relevant splanchnic arterial regions, the proximal vessel
origins in chronic mesenteric ischemia, and the proximal 10 cm of the SMA in
acute mesenteric ischemia are indeed fully visualized even under fasting
conditions (Fig. 1 A, Fig. 3 A). For assessment of the smaller vessels,
including the inferior mesenteric artery, the study suggests exploitation of
postprandial flow enhancement (Fig. 1 B, Fig. 2, Fig. 3 B). Significantly more
vessel segments were seen following caloric stimulation (P             

The paramagnetic contrast agent Gd-DTPA is characterized by a most favorable
safety profile. Anaphylactoid reactions are exceedingly rare, and the agent
lacks nephrotoxicity,17 even in the setting of renal failure.18,19 This aspect
is important, as renal function is often impaired in patients in whom mesenteric
ischemia is considered.20,21 The introduction of intravascular contrast agents,
currently under clinical investigation, may further augment the diagnostic
potential of 3D MRA in the assessment of the splanchnic arterial system. With
these agents, it will be possible to acquire several high-resolution data sets
of various vascular regions. It is even conceivable that these agents could be
used for the identification of mesenteric hemorrhage. Along with blood, the
intravascular agent can be expected to leave the vessel, thereby enhancing its
surroundings.

Functional MR-based techniques have been shown to be useful in the assessment of
chronic mesenteric ischemia. Phase-contrast MRI has been employed to assess flow
volumes in the SMA and SMV.7,14 Postprandial hyperemia in the SMA, shown to
exceed 100% in normal volunteers, was found to be significantly reduced (51%) in
a single patient with high-grade (>50%) stenosis.14 In a limited number of
patients with hemodynamically less significant stenoses (>50%), the postprandial
flow increase was indistinguishable from that seen in normal volunteers. The
same investigators reported that a postprandial SMV flow increase out of
proportion to SMA flow represents another marker for mesenteric ischemia induced
by a hemodynamically significant SMA stenosis. The discrepantly increased SMV
flow reflects recruitment of collateral flow, induced by the presence of a
significant SMA stenosis.14

When caloric stimulation was used, mesenteric flow was increased in all 10
volunteers evaluated. For maximal PC data quality, a gated fast 2D PC acquisition
strategy was employed. It allowed the collection of 7 to 15 measurements per RR
interval within a single breath-hold lasting 22 seconds. The rather poor
correlation of SMA and SMV flow volumes largely reflects asymmetries in the
splanchnic vascular anatomy. Thus, the gastric arterial blood is largely
supplied by the celiac trunk, while venous blood is drained by the SMV. This
also explains the higher flow volumes in the SMV than in the SMA. In patients
with clinical signs of chronic ischemia and hemodynamic relevant stenosis, blood
flow will not increase as in normal vessels following stimulation, since the
blood flow is already maximized because of the mesenteric ischemia.7,14

Three-dimensional MRA in conjunction with PC MRI provides a comprehensive
analysis of the splanchnic vasculature based on both morphology and function.
This approach promises to be useful in the detection of chronic as well as acute
mesenteric ischemia. The imaging protocol can be completed in less than 20
minutes and requires only short periods of breath-holding. The brevity and ease
of the examination are important, as the time between the onset of the symptoms
and implementation of therapy determines clinical outcome.10,22

References

1. Hollier LH, Bernatz PE, Pairolero PC, Payne WS, Osmundson PG. Surgical
management of chronic intestinal ischemia: A reappraisal. Surgery 1981;90:940-946.


2. Crawford ES, Morris GC Jr, Myhre HO, Roehm JO Jr. Celiac axis, superior
mesenteric artery, and inferior mesenteric artery occlusion: Surgical considerations.
Surgery 1977;82:856-866. 

3. Leung DA, McKinnon GC, Davis CP, Pfammatter T, Krestin GP, Debattin JF.
Breathheld contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiography. Radiology 1996;201:569-571. 

4. Prince MR, Narasimham DL, Stanley JC, et al. Breath-hold gadolinium-enhanced
MR angiography of the abdominal aorta and its major branches. Radiology
1995;197:785-792. 

5. Hany TF, Debatin JF, Leung DA, Pfammatter T. Evaluation of the aortoiliac and
renal arteries with breath-hold contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiography: Comparison
with conventional angiography. Radiology 1997;204:357-362. 

6. Gentile AT, Moneta GL, Taylor LM Jr, Park TC, McConnell DB, Porter JM.
Isolated bypass to the superior mesenteric artery for intestinal ischemia. Arch
Surg 1994;129:926-931. 

7. Burkart DJ, Johnson CD, Ehman RL. Correlation of arterial and venous blood
flow in the mesenteric system based on MR findings. 1993 ARRS Executive Council
Award. AJR 1993;161:1729-1782. 

8. Burkhart DJ, Johnson CD, Reading CC, Ehman RL. MR measurements of mesenteric
venous flow: Prospective evaluation in healthy volunteers and patients with
suspected chronic mesenteric ischemia. Radiology 1995;194:801-806. 

9. Hany TF, McKinnon GC, Leung DA, Pfammatter T, Debatin JF. Optimization of
contrast timing for breathhold 3D MR angiography. J Magn Reson Imag 1997;7:552-557.


10. McKinsey JF, Gewertz BL. Acute mesenteric ischemia. Surg Clin North Am
1997;77:307-318. 

11. Nakamura T, Moriyasu F, Ban N, et al. Quantitative measurement of abdominal
arterial blood flow using image-directed Doppler ultrasonography: Superior
mesenteric, splenic, and common hepatic arterial blood flow in normal adults. J
Clin Ultrasound 1989;17:261-268. 

12. Gentile AT, Moneta GL, Lee RW, Masser PA, Taylor LM Jr, Porter JM.
Usefulness of fasting and postprandial duplex ultrasound examinations for
predicting high-grade superior mesenteric artery stenosis. Am J Surg 1995;169:476-479.


13. Pelc LR, Pelc NJ, Rayhill SC, et al. Arterial and venous blood flow:
Noninvasive quantitation with MR imaging. Radiology 1992;185:809-812. 

14. Li KC, Whitney WS, McDonnell CH, et al. Chronic mesenteric ischemia:
Evaluation with phase-control cine MR imaging. Radiology 1994;190:175-179. 

15. Meaney JF, Prince MR, Nostrant TT, Stanley JC. Gadolinium-enhanced MR
angiography of visceral arteries in patients with suspected chronic mesenteric
ischemia. J Magn Reson Imaging 1997;7:171-176. 

16. Hany TF, Schmidt M, Davis CP, Goedhe SC, Debatin JF. Evaluation of 4
different post-processing techniques in the evaluation of contrast-enhanced 3D
MR angiography. AJR AM J Roentgenol 1998;170(4):907-912. 

17. Prince MR, Arnoldus C, Frisoli JK. Nephrotoxicity of high-dose gadolinium
compared with iodinated contrast. J Magn Reson Imaging 1996;6:162-166. 

18. Niendorf HP, Haustein J, Cornelius I, Alhassan A, Clauss W. Safety of
gadolinium-DTPA: Extended clinical experience. Magn Reson Med 1991;22:222-228. 

19. Haustein J, Niendorf HP, Krestin G, et al. Renal tolerance of gadolinium-DTPA/dimeglumine
in patients with chronic renal failure. Invest Radiol 1992;27:153-156. 

20. Valentine RJ, Martin JD, Myers SI, Rossi MB, Clagett GP. Aymptomatic celiac
and superior mesenteric artery stenoses are more prevalent among patients with
unsuspected renal artery stenoses. J Vasc Surg 1991;14:195-199. 

21. Missouris CG, Buckenham T, Cappuccio FP, MacGregor GA. Renal artery
stenosis: A common and important problem in patients with peripheral vascular
disease. Am J Med 1994;96:10-14. 

22. Boley SJ, Sprayregan S, Siegelman SS, Veith FJ. Initial results from an
aggressive roentgenological and surgical approach to acute mesenteric ischemia.
Surgery 1977;82:848-855. 

KEY WORDS. Mesenteric ischemia; blood flow quantitation; magnetic resonance
angiography

----------------------------------------------



