

  Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography  

      Issue: Volume 20(2), March/April 1996, pp 262-268
      Copyright: (C) Lippincott-Raven Publishers
      Publication Type: [Abdominal And Pelvic Imaging]
      ISSN: 0363-8715
      Accession: 00004728-199603000-00017
      Keywords: Arteries, mesenteric, Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA),
Arteries, stenosis, Ischemia       

 [Abdominal And Pelvic Imaging]

  Systolically Gated 3D Phase Contrast MRA of Mesenteric Arteries in Suspected
Mesenteric Ischemia  

  Wasser, Martin N.; Geelkerken, Robert H.; Kouwenhoven, Marc; van Bockel, J.
Hajo; Hermans, Jo; Kool, Leo J. Schultze; de Roos, Albert  

    Author Information 

  From the Departments of Diagnostic Radiology (M. N. Wasser, L. J. Schultze
Kool, and A. de Roos), Vascular Surgery (R. H. Geelkerken and J. H. van Bockel),
and Medical Statistics (J. Hermans), Leiden University Hospital, Leiden, and MR
Clinical Science, Philips Medical Systems, Best (M. Kouwenhoven), the Netherlands.
 

  Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. M. N. Wasser at Department
of Diagnostic Radiology, Bldg. I, C2-S, Leiden University Hospital, Rijnsburgerweg
10, 2333 AA, Leiden, the Netherlands.  

----------------------------------------------

    Outline

    Abstract

    MATERIALS AND METHODS

    Patients

    MRA

    DSA

    Data Analysis

    RESULTS

    Optimization of Parameters

    Asymptomatic Patients

    Symptomatic Patients

    DISCUSSION

    REFERENCES

Abstract

Objective: Our goal was to assess the value of MRA for detecting stenoses in the
celiac (CA) and superior mesenteric (SMA) arteries in patients suspected of
having chronic mesenteric ischemia, using an optimized systolically gated 3D
phase contrast technique.

: In an initial study in 24 patients who underwent conventional angiography of
the abdominal vessels for different clinical indications, a 3D phase contrast
MRA technique (3D-PCA) was evaluated and optimized to image the CAs and SMAs.
Subsequently, a prospective study was performed to assess the value of
systolically gated 3D-PCA in evaluation of the mesenteric arteries in 10
patients with signs and symptoms of chronic mesenteric ischemia. Intraarterial
digital subtraction angiography and surgical findings were used as the reference
standard.

: In the initial study, systolic gating appeared to be essential in imaging the
SMA on 3D-PCA. In 10 patients suspected of mesenteric ischemia, systolically
gated 3D-PCA identified significant proximal disease in the two mesenteric
vessels in 4 patients. These patients underwent successful reconstruction of
their stenotic vessels.

Conclusion: Cardiac-gated MRA may become a useful tool in selection of patients
suspected of having mesenteric ischemia who may benefit from surgery.

----------------------------------------------

The diagnosis of chronic mesenteric ischemia is difficult to make on clinical
criteria alone (1,2). It is often considered only after exclusion of more common
causes of chronic abdominal complaints, e.g., gastroesophageal reflux or
gastric, pancreatic, and gallbladder disorders. The diagnosis is supported by
the angiographic finding of significant stenoses in at least two of the three
main mesenteric arteries, of which the celiac (CA) and superior mesenteric (SMA)
artery are the most important (2). It has been found that these symptomatic
patients with two or three vessel disease may find relief of their symptoms by
surgical reconstruction of the obstructed vessels (2). Therefore, there is a
need for a preferably noninvasive screening test to detect the presence of
stenotic mesenteric arteries. Doppler ultrasound has been used for this purpose
(3,4), but often the origins of the vessels cannot be seen. In one study, the
failure rate to assess the patency of the mesenteric vessels was estimated to be
in the order of 25% (5).

Recently, it was found that MR measurement of difference of flow in the superior
mesenteric vein and artery between fasting and postprandial states may have
promise as a screening test in patients suspected of mesenteric ischemia (6,7).
This method, however, does not provide anatomical information on the location of
the vascular obstruction and the possibilities for surgical intervention. MR
angiography (MRA) has been applied successfully in the detection of stenoses in
a variety of vascular territories in the abdomen, e.g., renal arteries, vascular
shunts, and portal vein. To our knowledge, no study has been performed to
evaluate the potential of MRA in screening of patients with mesenteric ischemia.

Accordingly, to assess the potential of 3D phase contrast MRA (3D-PCA) in
determining the patency of the CA and SMA, we performed MRA in nonselected
patients and in patients suspected of having chronic mesenteric ischemia. We
first evaluated the effects of systolic gating to reduce pulsatility artifacts
in the mesenteric vessels (8,9) and optimized the parameters in asymptomatic
patients. Then we evaluated the value of systolically gated 3D-PCA in 15
patients who underwent conventional abdominal angiography for various indications,
but who were not suspected of having chronic mesenteric ischemia.

Subsequently, we performed systolically gated 3D-PCA in 10 patients suspected of
having mesenteric ischemia and compared the results with conventional angiography.
Symptomatic patients with two vessel disease (significant stenosis of the CA and
SMA) were considered eligible for surgical reconstruction of their mesenteric
vessels.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Patients

Twenty-four patients (2 women, 22 men; average age 64 years, range 37-81 years),
not suspected of having mesenteric ischemia, underwent intraarterial digital
subtraction angiography (DSA) and 3D-PCA for various indications: 15 patients
with aortic aneurysms, 6 with suspected stenosis/occlusion of the aorta or iliac
arteries, and 3 with suspected renal artery stenosis. In the first nine
patients, the technique of 3D-PCA was optimized. Then this optimized technique
was evaluated in the other 15 patients.

Subsequently, 10 patients (6 women, 4 men; average age 56 years, range 20-76
years), who were clinically suspected of having chronic mesenteric ischemia,
were examined by systolically gated 3D-PCA and intraarterial DSA. These
patients, in whom all other diagnostic tests had been negative, had severe
abdominal complaints, present for several years.

All patients had given informed consent.

MRA

All MR examinations were performed on a 0.5 T Philips T5II scanner with a 15
mT/m maximum gradient strength and a risetime of 10 mT in 0.6 ms. Standard
software (release 3) was used. As a receiver coil, a body wraparound surface
coil was used.

First, a coronal gradient echo (FFE) scout view was obtained (TR/TE 22/7 ms,
20[degrees] flip angle, slice thickness 5 mm).

The MRA study was performed using 3D-PCA. The angiographic study was done with
short TR (22 ms) and short TE (7 ms) values using partial (75%) echo sampling.
Other scan parameters were as follows: flip angle 20[degrees], 2 NEX, slab
thickness 6 cm reconstructed to 4-mm-thick slices with 2 mm overlap, 102 x 128
acquisition matrix, field of view 26 cm, first-order flow compensation. Flow was
measured in all directions with an encoding velocity of 40 cm/s. A caudal
presaturation slab was applied to suppress venous flow in the superior
mesenteric vein and inferior vena cava.

To reduce pulsatility artifacts in the mesenteric arteries, the method of
systolic gating (8,9) was applied. To determine the window for systolic imaging,
the flow profile in the aorta was obtained with a retrospectively triggered 2D
cine phase contrast velocity mapping technique (10). In the combination of
cardiac gating with 3D-PCA, the different flow sensitivity directions are
interleaved within every gate (2 k-lines/window). In cardiac gating, a steady
state is maintained during the cardiac cycle; i.e., the RF pulses and the
gradients continue, but acquisition of MR signal is limited to the user-defined
gate. Duration of a systolically gated 3D-PCA study was 10-15 min, depending on
the patient's heart rate. Duration of a nongated 3D-PCA study was 7 min.

Postprocessing of the images was done using a maximum intensity projection (MIP)
ray-tracing algorithm.

DSA

Intraarterial DSA was performed on a Philips 3000 Integris system. A pigtail
catheter was positioned at the level of origin of the CA, and projections of the
origins of the CA and SMA were made during injection of 30-40 ml contrast medium
(Ioxaglate).

Data Analysis

The conventional angiograms and MRA examinations were scored by consensus
reading by two sets of two observers who were unaware of the results of the
other examination. For both angiograms and 3D-PCA, the CA and SMA were scored
separately. The vessels were classified into the following categories: 0-50,
50-69, and 70-99% stenosed and occluded. Grading of stenosis on the conventional
angiograms was done according to lumen reduction at the site of stenosis
compared with the normal, more distal part of the vessel. Grading of stenosis on
PCA was done using a modification of the criteria described by Debatin et al.
(11) for 3D-PCA of the renal arteries. Mere luminal narrowing was considered a
mild stenosis (5 mm but with distal reconstitution of flow signal. A vessel was
considered to be occluded when no flow signal was seen in the distal part of the
artery.

RESULTS

Optimization of Parameters

The technique of 3D-PCA was optimized in a group of nine asymptomatic patients.
Sagittal and transverse MIP projections of normal CA and SMA arteries as
obtained with systolically gated 3D-PCA are shown in Fig. 1. In the first four
patients, we obtained both systolically gated and nongated 3D-PCA images. When
the method of cardiac gating was not applied, significant signal loss was
present in the aorta and the SMA (Fig. 2) in three of the four patients. We
therefore applied systolic gating in all other patients.

In three of the nine patients, severe ghosting artifacts were seen in the
systolically gated 3D-PCA, resulting in inconclusive examinations of the CA in
all these three patients and of the SMA in one patient. We observed that the
ghosting artifacts occurred when the gate width was set at a value of           
 

Asymptomatic Patients

Subsequently we performed a prospective study in which we compared the results
of optimized systolically gated 3D-PCA with conventional DSA in 15 patients not
suspected of having mesenteric ischemia. The results are shown in Table 1 (for
the CA) and Table 2 (for the SMA). MRA correctly identified three of five
moderately severe stenoses in the mesenteric vessels. MRA scored one false-positive
and one false-negative result in both the CA and the SMA in two patients with an
aortic aneurysm. In these patients, a loss of flow signal was seen in the
mesenteric vessels, presumably due to a combination of turbulent flow in the
aneurysm and systolic expansion of the aneurysm with translational motion of
adjacent mesenteric vessels. Two patients (MRA identified one of them) had
significant disease in both CA and SMA, although they had no signs or symptoms
of chronic mesenteric ischemia.

Symptomatic Patients

The results of systolically gated 3D-PCA in detecting significant disease in the
mesenteric vessels in the second group of patients, i.e., patients suspected of
having chronic mesenteric ischemia, are shown in Tables 3 and 4. None of the
patients had an aortic aneurysm. Six of the eight significant stenoses were
visualized by MRA. MRA correctly identified three patients with significant
stenosis in the proximal part of both the CA and the SMA. In one other patient,
both DSA and MRA showed an aneurysm immediately after the origin of the CA. The
stenosis at the origin of the CA in this patient as detected by DSA was not
visualized at MRA. This patient also had a significant stenosis in the SMA at
MRA, but not at DSA. In one patient, MRA showed an abrupt flow signal loss
proximal in the CA, which originated from the aorta at an acute angle. This
signal loss was scored as a severe stenosis. DSA in this patient was normal. In
one patient suspected of chronic mesenteric vascular disease, DSA showed an
impression of the CA by a diaphragmatic crus. This impression, however, was
scored as a severe stenosis by the observers. Although additional Doppler
ultrasound showed normal velocities in the CA, the normal finding at MRA was
scored as a false-negative result. In Fig. 5, an example of mild stenosis in the
CA and SMA is shown. Figure 6 depicts an occlusion of the CA and severe stenosis
in the SMA, visualized on both DSA and MRA.

The three patients with significant disease in both mesenteric vessels, and the
symptomatic patient with an aneurysm of the CA and moderate stenosis of the SMA,
underwent surgical reconstruction and are now all symptom-free for 4-12 months
after operation.

DISCUSSION

The application of MRA in the abdomen is under active investigation. In this
study we explored the potential of 3D-PCA for evaluating disease in the CA and
SMA in patients suspected of having chronic mesenteric ischemia. Since stenoses
are mostly due to atherosclerosis and occur often at the origins of the
mesenteric vessels (2,12,13), only the proximal parts of the arteries were
studied.

Initially, we optimized and evaluated the technique in asymptomatic patients. A
problem we encountered with standard 3D-PCA was that the SMA was often not
detected. This may be caused by the triphasic flow pattern that is normally
present in the SMA. Whereas the CA has a low resistance flow profile (4,14) with
continuous forward flow (as in the renal artery), the flow profile in the SMA
has a high resistance pattern (under fasting conditions) with early diastolic
flow reversal and slow late diastolic flow (15,16). MRA of vessels with highly
pulsatile blood flow is frequently hindered by shift artifacts (ghosting),
resulting in reduced intravascular signal and increased noise in the surrounding
tissues. Additionally, during systole, the high inflow of fresh spins ensures
high signal intensity. During diastole, however, the less efficient refreshment
of spins leads to considerable lower signal intensity. The resulting image may
therefore show signal intensity loss in vessels with pulsatile and retrograde
flow. By limiting data acquisition to the systolic phase of the cardiac cycle,
maximum signal intensity of fresh inflowing spins is obtained and angiographic
images with sharp vessel edges, improved contrast, and few pulsatility artifacts
can be obtained (8,9). Since pulsatile, retrograde flow is present not only in
the aorta but also in the SMA under normal conditions, systolic gating is
essential for imaging of the SMA. The CA, in contrast, has a continuous forward
flow pattern and is therefore also visible on nongated images. The desired gate
delay and gate width in gated PCA can be determined from aortic flow measurements.
In systolic gating we found a minimum gate delay of 100 ms (due to hardware
conditions) and a minimum gate width of 200 ms (minimum time required to encode
the different flow sensitivity directions). A shorter gate width resulted in
ghosting artifacts due to insufficient data acquisition during the systolic
phase of the cardiac cycle. Due to these restrictions, the optimal parameters
cannot be chosen in every patient.

We first compared the results of systolically gated 3D-PCA and DSA in a group of
15 nonselected patients. Moderately severe stenosis was found in five mesenteric
vessels. MRA showed three of these stenoses correctly. False-positive results
were obtained with MRA in two vessels. Both false-positive and false-negative
results occurred in patients with aortic aneurysms. Two asymptomatic patients
had significant stenosis of both the CA and the SMA. Apparently, these patients
had developed adequate collateral pathways to ensure bowel vascularization.
Since we only examined the proximal parts of the CA and SMA and did not image
the inferior mesenteric artery, these collaterals were not detected.

In a selected group of 10 patients suspected of having chronic mesenteric
ischemia, two mesenteric vessels were occluded. We found a significant stenosis
in six of the mesenteric vessels at DSA. MRA identified four of these stenoses
correctly. A stenosis proximal to an aneurysm of the CA was not visible at MRA.
Another stenosis in the CA at DSA, not seen at MRA, may, in retrospect, have
been caused by an external compression of the CA by a diaphragmatic crus at DSA
during deep inspiration, since Doppler examination of the CA was also normal. A
false-positive result of MRA was seen in a patient with a CA branching off the
aorta at an acute angle. This patient showed signal loss proximal in the CA,
probably due to turbulent flow. Systolically gated 3D-PCA identified significant
disease in both the CA and the SMA in four symptomatic patients (one with an
aneurysm of the CA). These four patients underwent successful surgical
reconstruction of their mesenteric vessels. Systolically gated 3D-PCA may
therefore become a useful tool in selection of patients with mesenteric ischemia
who may benefit from surgery.

Up to now, the diagnosis of chronic mesenteric vascular syndrome is made only
retrospectively, if the symptoms disappear after reconstructive surgery.
Stenoses or occlusions in the mesenteric arteries are prerequisites to
confirming the diagnosis, but do not prove the diagnosis of chronic mesenteric
ischemia. Possibly, combining the method of systolically gated 3D-PCA with the
recently described method of MR measurements of difference of flow in the
superior mesenteric vein and artery between fasting and postprandial states
(6,7) may further increase the screening potential of MRI in patients suspected
of having chronic mesenteric vascular disease.

REFERENCES

1. Rogers DM, Thompson JE, Garret WV, Talkington CM, Patman RD. Mesenteric
vascular problems. Ann Surg 1982;195:554-65. Ovid Full Text 

2. Geelkerken RH, Bockel van JH, Roos de WK, Hermans J, Terpstra JL. Chronic
mesenteric vascular syndrome; the long results of reconstructive surgery. Arch
Surg 1991;126:1101-6. 

3. Koslin DB, Mullogan SA, Berland LL. Duplex assessment of the splanchnic
vasculature. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1992;13:34-9. 

4. Jager KA, Fortner GS, Thiele BL, Strandness DE. Noninvasive diagnosis of
intestinal angina. JCU 1984;12:588-91. 

5. Roobottom CA, Dubbins PA. Significant disease of the celiac and superior
mesenteric arteries in asymptomatic patients: predictive value of Doppler
sonography. AJR 1993;161:985-8. 

6. Burkart DJ, Johnson CD, Reading CC, Ehman RL. MR measurements of mesenteric
venous flow: prospective evaluation in healthy volunteers and patients with
suspected chronic mesenteric ischemia. Radiology 1995;194:801-6. 

7. Li KCP, Hopkins KL, Dalman RL, Song CK. Simultaneous measurement of flow in
the superior mesenteric vein and artery with cine phase-contrast MR imaging
value in diagnosis of chronic mesenteric ischemia. Radiology 1995;194:327-30. 

8. Graaf de RG, Groen JP. MR angiography with pulsatile flow. Magn Reson Imag
1992;10:25-34. 

9. Selby K, Saloner D, Anderson C, Chien D, Lee R. MR angiography with a cardiac
phase specific window. J Magn Res Imag 1992;2:637-43. 

10. Nayler GL, Firmin DN, Longmore DB. Blood flow imaging by cine magnetic
resonance. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1986;10:715-22. Ovid Full Text 

11. Debatin JF, Spritzer CE, Grist TM, et al. Imaging of the renal arteries:
value of MR angiography. AJR 1991;157:981-90. 

12. Crawford ES, Morris GC, Myhre HO, Roehm JOF. Celiac axis, superior
mesenteric artery and inferior mesenteric artery occlusion: surgical considerations.
Surgery 1977;82:856-66. 

13. Rogers DM, Thompson JE, Garret WV, Talkington CM, Patman RD. Mesenteric
vascular problems. Ann Surg 1982;195:554-65. Ovid Full Text 

14. Nichols SC, Kohler TR, Martin RL, Strandness DE. Use of hemodynamic
parameters in the diagnosis of mesenteric insufficiency. J Vasc Surg 1986;3:507-10.


15. Lewis BD, James EM. Current applications of duplex and color Doppler
ultrasound imaging. Mayo Clin Proc 1989;64:1158-69. 

16. van Oostayen JA, Wasser MNJM, Hogezand RA van, Griffioen G, Roos A de.
Activity of Crohn disease assessed by measurement of superior mesenteric artery
flow with Doppler US. Radiology 1994;193:551-4. 

Index Terms: Arteries, mesenteric; Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA);
Arteries, stenosis; Ischemia

----------------------------------------------



